Key to tape, so here's what I say.
Okay, good.
The tape is running, and we're talking with Professor Gerda Lerna.
One of the chapters in my new book, by the way, I should tell you, is very interesting, which will have particular interest to you, will be on the influence of the Jewish emigre booksellers.
Really?
Yes, I've been trying to locate as many of the survivors as I can.
I've already interviewed a number of... There are many.
There aren't many left.
There were many.
Really, that's very interesting.
They were extraordinary.
I just want to include the poet Felix Pollack, who came to Madison as an established, he had a law degree from Vienna and was a poet in German and became a librarian.
And built up the finest small press collection, I think, in the country at the UW.
Really?
How do we spell his name?
P-O-L-L-A-K.
Is he alive?
No, he's dead.
But I think he did a great job in terms of, you know, books.
Well, one of the areas I'm researching is that not only did these people come and bring their knowledge and their expertise, but they brought an attitude of book selling, of scholarship.
These people didn't just sell books.
They understood books.
They explained books.
They discovered why certain books were important.
It does feed into, in a way, what you write about, why history matters, why certain texts matter.
And it sounds to me like this Felix Pollack, has anything been written about him at all?
Well, he's been very widely recognized as a poet, and he has also been recognized now in Austria and in Germany.
as a major poet.
But about this aspect of his life, no.
You might want to talk to his widow.
Okay.
Who lives here.
I can give you her number.
That would be wonderful.
And just tell her that... I will.
I suggested it.
Her name is Sarah Pollack.
S-A-R-A-H.
S-A-R-A.
No H. Okay.
And it's 608-238-
8147.
Oh, wonderful.
You know who else I've interviewed already is Otto Bettman, who is now 96, 97 years old.
But I was amazed to see that not only is he alive,
but wonderfully lucid, living in Florida, and as soon as I heard that he had sold, that the Bettman archive had been sold to Bill Gates, which of course does presage the future, I went to see him, and he played a Bach piece for me.
Well, you see, the difference is that the European middle-class intellectuals had a very broad education, and I think that's what we brought, a very broad education.
One was not just a, you know, it was expected that you were to be conversant with the literature of at least two languages, with arts, with music, with theater, with opera.
That was like standard.
I mean, you couldn't, you know, my father was a businessman.
He was a passionate chamber music player.
You know, normal.
And Dr. Bettman's father, it was a similar situation, you know.
His father played with a group, music.
And then, of course, as the Nazis... We have music concerts in the home every month.
I...
grew up with the entire classical chamber music literature.
And I think, like yourself, it took Dr. Bettman many, many years to agree to go back to Germany.
And he really didn't want to go, and it took a great deal of... And maybe this provides a way into the discussion here.
Why did you feel that you had to write a book with the title, Why History Matters?
What are the anxieties that you have that would occasion such a title?
Well, I think history...
is under attack in this culture but much worse it is being ignored and i think a whole generation or two have grown up thinking history doesn't matter at all and you know when i was president of the organization of american historians in 1982 i was the first woman president in 50 years of any of the historical
I sort of broke the barrier.
At that time, history education was in such a crisis that we were graduating PhDs that couldn't get jobs.
And the pressure was on me to use the organization's authority and the authority of my office to encourage people to cut down on the training of historians
on the grounds that there were no jobs for them.
I resisted that totally and said, on the contrary, we're dealing with a small blip.
The demand for historians is going to rise, and furthermore, we're not a trade school.
We don't just train people to enter the trade.
There are many people that can take a PhD in history into other fields.
and I was proven right and there was an upswing in employment and so I ever since that time I've given a lot of thought to that so that's one reason the other reason is that as you get older I think all of us become more preoccupied with our own history with explaining to our grandchildren you know what it was like when that sort of thing and
I've been, you know, and having played a role in creating a new field of history, as I have, I've always had to answer questions of, well, why do you do this?
And what's the point?
And I feel very strongly that the history-making is a...
a basic human necessity.
In fact, it is what distinguishes us from animals because we are the species that is able to transmit to its children what went on before we came.
And animals can't do that.
And that makes the difference.
That makes us human.
So doing history is a basic human necessity.
And the last major reason why I think this is a very felicitous choice of title is that for the past 30 years I've been occupied in helping to restore the history of women.
And women, as you may know, are more than half of the human population and they've been deprived of history.
And I have seen and experienced what the absence of history means to people, and conversely, the dynamic energizing effect on people when they become aware of history.
So I really think I know why history matters, and I wanted to share that.
You say being denied history, now that women have a sense of history, almost ironically, you see in some quarters people saying, well, why does history matter?
Is that a paradox there?
You know, we're talking about half the human population.
So some people, you know, not all people in half the population will have the same opinion.
The women who have
studied women's history, absolutely know its significance and are very, very much interested in it.
And they're not the same women that say history doesn't matter.
I see the acquiring of history and of a historical sense as a way of giving meaning to your own life and pursuits.
And I have seen it happen many, many times.
I have had classes.
For example, in the 70s, I organized.
In 1976, I secured a number of grants and cooperated with the Smithsonian Institution and Sarah Lawrence College to hold a
seminar in women's history for leaders of women's organizations.
And we invited 45 women from 45 organizations, and they had to be either president or educational director or something on that level, okay?
High officials.
And we had every major women's organization in the country represented.
And we had a 21-day workshop where they lived together
and we immersed ourselves in women's history.
Out of that group, at least five women pursued a higher educational degree as a result of that.
But that was the least of it.
They adopted it as a class project, the project of institutionalizing Women's History Month nationally, and that is the group that did it.
That comes directly out of my seminar.
Really?
And when was this, Doctor?
1976.
So really, it goes, because Women's History Month is every March, I believe.
Yeah, it was proclaimed by President Carter.
And in order to get it proclaimed, you have to get the signatures of every member of Congress, of a majority of the House and Senate.
And that has been done every year.
Was there resistance to this?
No.
It was popular.
It was a cheap way for the politicians to placate women.
Without really having to give anything.
It took a lot of work and organization.
Now it's well established.
But my name is on the first proclamation by the president.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Every March, I also write a children's book review column.
I have a number of projects.
Once a month, I review eight books.
And for March, I took note of Women's History Month.
Well, but what I'm saying, I'm citing this as an example of the dynamic impact of consciousness of history.
Okay?
Okay.
on a group of women who are all, I mean, these women were self-selected to be practical, politically oriented organizers, right?
These are not your intellectuals that sit and study books, and yet they were so energized by the concepts of women's history that they engaged on a big national campaign.
So not only history.
That wasn't my idea, by the way.
I resisted it.
I thought it was too ambitious.
You resisted what?
Which idea?
To do this as a project.
I said, this is crazy.
This is too ambitious.
It's reaching too high.
And they said, well, you gave us the history, so now leave the organizing to us.
And I said, okay.
And I thought that's the last I'd hear of it, but it wasn't.
Do you see a parallel with Black History Month?
I mean, the same kinds of forces?
Well, it's a parallel impulse to restore history to people who have been denied their history.
Of course, the big difference between minorities and women is women are the majority.
And if you can keep the majority ignorant of their past, you can do almost anything in social engineering.
Isn't that what Orwell says quite specifically in 1984, George Orwell?
I think he says that quite specifically.
Really?
I have not read it.
Yeah, to control the future, you control the present.
To control the present, you control the past.
That's true.
Then he knew it.
He was right.
He understood it.
I haven't read that.
Dr. Vartan Gregorian pointed this out to me in a recent interview that I did with him for this new book.
But I want to also point out to you the very sort of specific way when I say women were denied their past.
This was a systematic and organized denial, okay?
And while not every man...
then alive was participating in it.
It always, in every country in the world, it was done in the same way.
And the way was, first of all, educationally disadvantaged women, systematically, all over the world, so that up until the last two decades of the 20th century,
women's illiteracy was infinitely higher all over the world.
Really?
Male.
Are there figures to support that?
Oh, certainly.
Where would I find those figures for this new book that I'm writing?
You would find that in my book, The Creation of Feminist Conscience.
Okay, good.
Where I give an overview of the educational disadvantaging of women over 2,000 years.
And it was done by...
making both men and women believe that thinking was a male hormonal function.
I'm sorry to laugh.
I never quite put it that way, but it's true.
Thinking is male.
Women are not capable of abstract thought.
And even as late as the 1880s in this country,
There was a famous, when the big, you know, there was a large woman's movement then, and they were pushing for the establishment of colleges.
They were pushing for college access to women.
And this Dr. Clark then did a study on, I think, six people and came to the learned conclusion that if women use their brains,
the blood would rush to the brain and would be displaced from the uterus where it belongs.
So women who had education would be incapable of performing their female function.
This is in your book?
Oh, yes, yes.
And this was enormously influential.
Dr. Clark was cited for 20 years.
Wow.
All right, so that's one part, educational disadvantaging.
Secondly, categorizing women as being incapable of thought.
And third, and this is perhaps of interest to you especially, because there were in every century for at least 1,500 years, women, individual women who exercised their brains, who had acquired education and mostly as a class privilege, so it were the richer women, the women of the nobility and so forth,
and who left a valuable and enormously interesting body of work dealing with the status of women.
These books were
Hardly, if they were printed at all, they were printed in tiny editions, and they were never reprinted.
That would definitely indicate to me a conspiracy, as you pointed out.
Not a conspiracy.
Nobody ever said, let's do this to women.
There was never a cabal that got together and... No, no, that would be a very gross distortion of what I'm saying.
Okay, but you did say systematic, so it does... Systematic, yes.
Systematic.
caused by superstition, by belief, the mythical belief in the inferiority of women.
So if you even saw something done by a woman, it couldn't be significant.
You were taught to believe that it had to be insignificant, right?
They were taught to believe it, and therefore they made it that way.
In other words...
And this is, by the way, still with us.
I mean, books by women are not as frequently reviewed in the major reviewing places.
Do you really think that's the case, though?
Well, we're beginning to break out of it.
But it's maybe 10 years old that it's not the case.
Before that, it was absolutely so.
Absolutely.
And, you know, why did the...
Why did the Brontes and other great novelists take male names?
I was just about to ask quite the same question.
That's why.
That's right.
And then, of course, when it became known that these were women, there were attacks on them.
That's what I'm saying.
It didn't require a conspiracy since everybody believed in it.
It's the same as with white supremacist ideas.
as long as everybody believed them to be true and God-given, you didn't have to have people get together and say, let's do this, that, and the other thing.
They knew how to do that.
You just let them do what they were taught to do.
Do you see a parallel relevance here between what you're writing about and talking about and this debate that
That seems to rage throughout the land on the culture wars, the arguments over which canons, literary... Well, it's not a parallel.
It's this culture war, so-called, is in fact the response of traditionalists to the challenges mounted by feminism and by the scholarship of people in minority groups.
we have finally reached a stage where they have to take us seriously.
Before, they just ridiculed us and marginalized us.
But now we have made inroads.
A new generation of students is fascinated by what we're doing.
The courses we're giving are overfilled every place.
And so people are fighting back.
The traditionalists are fighting back.
And they're fighting back in a very, actually very hackneyed and unimaginative way because they don't usually bother to read what we write at all.
You know, they just, they know beforehand that it's no good.
Well, I guess the defense is, you know, it kind of picks up on the characterization of who cares about a bunch of dead white European males.
Well, you know, that's one of those things that's like, you know,
It's like this old canard that every black man is looking to marry your sister, you know?
No feminist ever said that.
That is, you know, no feminist ever said, let's not learn about dead white men.
That's something that was invented.
Maybe some students said that.
Students say all kinds of outrageous things.
They're young people.
But...
In fact, in most feminist scholarship, the heroes, the male heroes and icons of the traditional culture are taken very seriously and interest in them is revived.
But we're looking at them from the point of view of the people who were also there and were not mentioned.
Okay, so, I mean, a very good example seems to me is Aristotle.
Aristotle, you know, is certainly one of the pillars of Western civilization.
You can't study Western culture without studying Aristotle.
But if you study Aristotle and ignore the fact that he was living in a society in which slaves and women were oppressed, then what Aristotle wrote is not seen in its full roundness and fullness.
You have to understand that.
That doesn't mean we don't study Aristotle.
We just don't omit that fact.
I don't see how any intelligent person could argue against that.
Well, they are arguing against that because they don't read what we say.
They just set up these straw men and start hitting them.
But it does concern me, I think, as a former English major and a reader of literature, that when I hear it reported, for instance, that Amherst College, a marvelous institution, three years ago graduated summa cum laude,
a graduate in English, a major, an English major, who never took a course in Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, or Dryden, you know, or Spencer.
How is it possible that a person who could purport to be a major in English literature... Well, you know, these anecdotal evidences, first of all, I don't know where this comes from.
I doubt it greatly.
I could cite a source for that, but that's irrelevant.
Well, it's not irrelevant, because most of these anecdotes have
turned out to be false.
This person may have had a very thorough training as an undergraduate.
The English courses is 20 courses in Shakespeare and therefore got credit for this.
I mean, really.
Can I assure you, I would never report this unless I checked it out.
And I haven't yet, okay?
Well, try it.
Well, I intend to go to the English department at Amherst and say, is this true?
And in fact, I'd like to talk to the student.
The sense is that if it's a summa cum laude, the individual must have probably known a great deal already about Shakespeare.
Exactly.
In other words, I doubt this very much.
But secondly...
If it was so and I were a professor at Amherst, I would have probably objected to it.
But that's not the issue.
The issue, you know, culture and literature are not zero-sum games that if you put in some new people, you leave out the others.
That's not how education works.
People who are interested in education and who learn how to read and comprehend and how to research, that's what we're supposed to teach them in the university.
We're supposed to teach them how to research and think and interpret.
We're not supposed to teach them a certain quantity of you have to know so much of this and so much of that
I think that's a very false thing.
You know, I couldn't agree more.
Educated persons, as we have said about these refugees, you know, you could take everything away from them and they will come as paupers into a new country and they will bring their inquisitive minds and their good habits of scholarship with them.
That's what we're supposed to teach in college.
And if I have to take a student who is, let us say, an African-American student
who has never been taught anything about people like himself in a positive way and who comes to school and is turned off by school because of that.
And if I have to give him a heavy dose of a year or more of nothing but African-American history, culture, literature, in order to get him to begin to engage intellectually, I can then lead that student to a broader view.
And that's what we're doing.
Nobody is saying you study only narrow things.
I can just speak of my own experience.
I am the founder of the first graduate program in women's history in the United States at Sarah Lawrence College in 1972.
We've graduated 99 students out of that program.
That's a master's program.
I then went on to found a Ph.D.
program in women's history at the University of Wisconsin.
Madison.
When I came in the history department there were 55 members of the history department and I was the third woman.
We have graduated some 26 PhDs.
The basis of our program that I set up was that every student in our program has to meet all the requirements of the American history PhD plus
a parallel additional requirement in women's history.
The result is that every one of our students has been hired and has a splendid job because they're the best trained historians.
That's wonderful.
Okay.
Why don't we cite that instead of that one Amherst student?
Well, that's great.
That's the answer I was looking for, by the way.
Here it is.
This is a fact, and you can verify that, and I would very much like for you to
to take an interest in that because we don't have a PR person.
We do this ourselves.
Well, who would I contact?
Oh, Professor Linda Gordon.
Linda Gordon.
And Professor Gene Boydston.
Gene with two... J-E-N?
J-E-A?
E-N-N-E.
Uh-huh.
I can give you their numbers.
What is her surname again, please?
Boydston, B-O-Y-D-S-T-O-N.
Okay.
She is, at the moment, the acting director of the program, but they're co-directors.
Linda Gordon is not teaching this semester, but you can reach them both.
If you want, I'll give you their number.
Fine, please.
608.
I'll give you the office number.
2630647 is Gene Boydston.
Mm-hmm.
And Linda Gordon is 263-1777.
Okay.
I mean, they can... Do you know Jean Hedrick at Trinity College?
Joan Hedrick?
I don't know her, but I know Barbara Sitcherman at Trinity College.
Yeah, she wrote the wonderful book on the Pulitzer Prize-winning biography of, was it Harriet Beecher still?
Oh, yes, right, right.
I did a really wonderful interview with her last summer for this new book I'm working on.
Wonderful.
Well, I...
I just read today's Times, this Trinity College president.
Exactly, yeah.
Thanks, too.
All right, well, anyway, I mean, that much on the culture.
Well, let's talk a little bit about my book.
Okay, well, actually, we have, you know, but let's actually direct ourselves more directly to it.
But we have been there.
You have given me a lot of quotes, by the way, that absolutely are, I think...
um appropriate to to the to the book here because we are talking about why history matters i mean i ask you a question when we talk about the absence of history uh you're aware of course in 19 was it 1994
uh when when the uh national library of serbia in sarajevo was destroyed quite deliberately probably to destroy the history if you're going to ethnic cleanse a people and eliminate them right you have to destroy their history don't you it was not the first library that was destroyed of course not remember the library in alexandria that was destroyed uh by the invaders and so on this has been a
And, of course, the Nazis with their book burning.
Yes, that's true.
You write, of course, about your experiences.
Yes.
Did you have an awareness then that this was the destruction of heritage and history, or was it more of a more personal anxiety, do you think?
Well, I mean, the book burnings were horrifying.
I mean, the fact that
Books were burned.
I think it's one of the most terrifying signs of barbarism.
And at the time, we didn't know that the gas ovens were next, but in a sense, it's an inevitable sequence, you know.
For this collection, a number of the essays are new.
Yes.
And I think it's very important to point that out.
This does not merely reflect work produced over a period of... No, no.
Half of them are new.
And I think that's important to point out.
So this for you was a new work entirely.
Oh, yes.
The ones that are old...
all but one have really been printed only in very small, you know, editions of a few hundred.
Mostly lectures, but for the first time in print.
Tell me about the thinking that went into saying it's time for this book, why you felt, and how you see all these essays coming.
Well, I think I answered that already at the beginning, but I will answer it in a more personal way.
Okay.
The book is called Why History Matters, Life and Thought.
And what I had in mind initially was simply to gather together some work that would illuminate the main themes in my work over the last 30 years.
And I didn't have that title in mind, and I just had in mind the title History and Thought, Life and Thought.
And the reason for Life and Thought is that, as I said before, you know that
age-old belief that men are in charge of thought and women are in charge of living, daily living and social relations and all that.
And I always felt that that was wrong and I also felt that the artificial separation between life and thought was wrong.
We are, you know, when we do our best thinking, we bring our life into it and
when we do our best living we should bring our thought into it and I was sort of interested in showing that and collected the essays from that point of view and decided to put in some autobiographical essays to show essentially the sources of my thought you know and then I when the book was all finished all together
I didn't like the title.
I thought it was not specific enough.
And then I put this title and several others on a sheet of paper.
And as soon as I came to Why History Matters, I realized that actually the whole effort was inspired by a conviction that history matters.
And so then I changed the arrangement somewhat.
And I added the last essay.
And in that essay, I tried to sort of synthesize 35 years of my thought and work.
And so in many ways, it's a very personal book.
And it's also an experiment for me because I was a writer long before I became a historian.
Which your work reflects, by the way.
I find it very accessible writing.
Right, right.
I mean, people should not be, and we'll talk about the perceived audience for this, I think people should not be scared away by the publication of Oxford University Press, for instance.
No, it's a very accessible book.
My readers are, I have many more readers outside of the academic world than inside.
I always have for all my books.
But I have never before tried to combine the two voices, so to speak, the literary voice and the academic voice.
And this was an effort to do so, and I think it's interesting from that point of view.
People have told me that they respond very well to that.
There was a wonderful review of this book last week in the Boston Globe.
Yes, there was.
Yes, I was very gratified by that.
It was a wonderful review, I have to say.
I had just received the review copy myself, and I instantly called Oxford the following morning.
I said, I'd love to talk to this woman.
That's the happy consequence of that review.
Do you have a reader in mind?
Can you visualize a reader?
No, I write for...
All kinds of readers.
I write for men and women.
I guess, to a certain extent, I always write for my grandchildren.
That's wonderful.
I do.
I have three grandsons and a granddaughter.
I have already tried out the first chapter on my grandson, who is 11.
Now, what do you mean by that, though?
Obviously, you're talking more than just for children.
I think that you're talking... Oh, of course.
It's not for children.
No, but what I'm saying is, you're talking for the future, and I understand what you're saying, which you're writing for the grandchildren.
Yes, I'm writing... I'm hoping to write... I mean, I'm hoping that when the first enchantment with the new media culture will have run its course...
We're now in the second generation of children that were raised on television.
And by that I mean children to whom television is as much of a cultural presence, if not more, than all their living relatives and teachers.
All right?
This is new in the history of the world, and we have not yet even begun to understand the consequences.
But I think
the next generation after that one, or even the youngest of the current generation, my grandchildren's generation, they will rediscover printed culture, and they will rediscover a longer view of, a more philosophical view of search for meaning in life.
And I think in that search for meaning, understanding histories
in the way that I'm trying to explain it here, it's going to be very helpful to them.
And this is who I'm writing for.
Will they rediscover printed culture in print or through other media?
It doesn't matter how they discover it.
It doesn't matter if they would rather listen to it on the tape while they're driving and doing something else, or if they would rather, you know, have it on a CD-ROM and read it on the computer.
That doesn't bother you.
No, I think they're missing something very important in not knowing what it is to have an original in your hand.
But I think that too will come back.
But I think that we already see that the new media can lead people to a greater appreciation of
of the old media, for example, the phenomenon of Opera Winfrey's book club.
Isn't that amazing?
I mean, that's very encouraging.
It really is.
It's a remarkable phenomenon, and I think we...
It just indicates what could happen if we use the media better.
Well, also, you have spawned now thousands of other book clubs, which, I mean, that seems to be a phenomenon that's sprouting up all over the country now, these book clubs.
Well, I think you have two kinds of phenomena that are sprouting out, that have sprouted up in this consumer culture and TV culture, media culture.
that are directly countervailing forces.
One is these various book and culture clubs, and the other is the various self-help groups that people are in, or support groups, support networks.
Both of those represent a search for community and a search for meaning beyond one's own life.
That's the essence of my message.
That's what history gives you.
It gives you that sense.
That's marvelous.
We've got a lot of good material here, by the way.
Okay, well... Let's continue for a little longer if you want, but I want to assure you that
you've given me a lot of excellent material here for this piece so uh you know the the reading of the book it falls on my shoulders so so don't be concerned if i haven't asked it will be yours that's that's right so don't be concerned if i haven't asked you directly about the essays you know they they quite eloquently speak for themselves so so i think we really are touching on points that
that do matter to me.
You talk about printed culture.
Do you mean book culture?
Do you have a sense of what book culture is?
What is book culture?
In fact, it works into the subtitle of my new book.
I'm really interested in the status of book culture on the eve of a new millennium.
Well, you know, I think any historian or any person who studies history will tell you of the enormous
revolutionizing impact of the printed word on history, you know, historically, and it wasn't immediately manifest in the way that we would think of it now.
I mean, when Gutenberg first printed the Bible, the next things that were printed were religious pamphlets, right?
That's correct.
And the printing of religious pamphlets in large numbers
was largely what enabled the spread of the Protestant Reformation.
Without it, it couldn't have happened the way it did.
So that was long before people in general were reading books, right?
That's absolutely correct.
And it took about a hundred years or perhaps, or more, before the real potential of the new medium
was beginning to be realized and implemented, namely to get the thought of the past into the hands of a broader, literate public, still male at the time.
And, well, if you compare that now, everything happens faster in the 20th century, but it doesn't happen that much faster.
And I'm, you know, I'm very impressed with the enormous potential of the new media for education and for improvement, whereas at the moment they're mostly being used in a very negative way.
You know?
And I hope that if we...
you know, if we keep working at it, enough people keep concerned with it, that we're going to begin to develop the positive potential.
Certainly, let's say, a revival of interest in Jane Austen and in the Bronte's, the great novelist, you know, English novelist, through
television is a very, you know, it's a very good thing.
Sure.
Shakespeare being produced in movies.
Right.
You don't need to study Shakespeare in a course.
You can see Shakespeare on TV and in the movies.
Exactly.
On cassettes.
So this is wonderful.
More people are conversant with Shakespeare today than were
when the so-called classical curriculum reigned and only very few people had access to it.
Very few male persons had access to it.
Keep that in mind.
The things we leave out also matter very much.
And by leaving out of consideration who were the people that were engaged in that traditional culture, we leave out...
It's very negative aspects.
It was a training ground for elites.
We call this current age the information age, and I think it is appropriate because information is really nothing more than data.
Information is right, but I think what we are missing the most is ways of making it a new cultural renaissance, which it could be.
which as yet it is not.
And you did earlier predict a return to the values and disciplines of what you call the printed culture.
You do foresee that, I guess.
Well, I think that what we are able to do now, theoretically, and this, you know, the proliferation of interest in Shakespeare and in the British novelists and so forth, is an example.
We...
The new media would enable us, if we weren't so interested in using them only for commercial gain, but really use them educationally, we could spread the old printed culture to people who never before had a share in it.
This we're able to do, right?
Right, exactly.
I mean, I remember coming to a village in northern Italy
where I didn't speak the language, and I was staying in a small, like, hotel that was really run by, like, a teenage girl was at the counter, and her mom was in the kitchen, and I was spending a real quiet evening, didn't know anybody there, and she said, she invited a gesture that I should watch the television with her.
And what were we watching?
Her favorite program, Columbo.
Okay?
And all of a sudden, we had something in common.
We were talking about the Columbo programs with our hands and feet, you know?
That's funny.
Well, it could have been, you know, with a little bit of luck, it could also have been Shakespeare or Jane Austen, right?
But it wasn't.
But that's a wonderful story.
I think there might have been one other question that I wanted to ask you.
I think your voice is fading.
I'm sorry.
I'm looking at my tape.
That's why.
Let's see if we're waiting on it.
I think we've covered a lot of area here.
What do you think?
Well, one of the, I think, perhaps one area I would like to speak about.
Okay.
Just before you do that, let me just turn the tape on the other side so we start fresh.